---
title: ImageUtopiaApp
authors: Steven Rudenko
date: 13/01/2024
---

# Image Utopia App

    Author(s): Steven Rudenko
    Last edited by: Steven Rudenko
    Last edited: 13/01/2024

This app is an image orgonizer/image library app. It allows the User to store their images in one location (collection). Images can be organized with folders. User also is able to change the name, put comments, tags and rating to the images. Application also alows the User to view images, filter them by a large variaty of parameters, sort them.

App does NOT provide any editing capabilities

---

## Table of contents
<!-- TOC -->

- [Image Utopia App](#image-utopia-app)
    - [Table of contents](#table-of-contents)
    - [UI](#ui)
    - [Main features](#main-features)
        - [Collection](#collection)
            - [metadata](#metadata)
            - [images folder](#images-folder)
        - [Sidebar](#sidebar)
            - [Top left flyout](#top-left-flyout)
            - [Folders](#folders)
        - [Center part](#center-part)
            - [Image grid](#image-grid)
            - [Top row](#top-row)
                - [Folder/Tag filter](#foldertag-filter)
        - [Right column](#right-column)
            - [Image data](#image-data)

<!-- /TOC -->
---

## UI

Here is the main window layout:

#TODO: add layout image

---

## Main features

### Collection

Collection - is a folder (created by the app) that contains all the images and meta data.

To create collection User can press a button on the top left of the app and in the flyout menu choose `create new collection`. (#TODO: add description of collection creataion menu). If the User opens the app for the first time, or previously created and opened collection was not found, instead of the main window User will see the collection creation window.

In the root of the collection folder there is an `images` folder and a `metadata.json`.

#### metadata

`metadata.json` is a json file that contains following data:
- folders: a list of all User created [folders](#folders) with their own metadata:
    - `id` 
    - `name`
    - `description`
    - `related_tags`

#### images folder

`images` folder is filled in with images, each within their own folder with the image id (generated by the app) as the name of the folder. This image folders contain the image itself, `metadata.json` and a preview (compressed) version of the image. Preview image is used in the [image grid](#image-grid) within the app.

- `metadata.json` consists of the image metadata (which is recorded upon image upload and edited by user within the app)
    - `id`
    - `name` (image file name)
    - `size` (in bytes)
    - `ext` (png, jpg, etc.)
    - `tags` (list)
    - `folders` (list)
    - `isDeleted`
    - `width`
    - `height`
    - `annotations`

---

### Sidebar

#### Top left flyout

The menu button is located on the top left of the screen. This is a standart flyout menu with options such as:
- `create new collection`
- `open collection`
- `settings`
- `quit`

#### Folders

Images are sorted within folders. Almost the whole left side of the app is the vertical list of all folders. Each row of this list shows the name of the folder and the amount of images within it.

Each folder within left column is a button. Upon clicking the image folder, User enters said folder. The [right column](#inspector) now only shows metadata of this column. The [central grid](#center-part) is now filled with images within chosen folder. A chosen folder is highlited.

Each image can be located within multiple columns

There are *system defined* folders, such as:
- `all`: consists of all images within the [collection](#collection)
- `uncategorized`: images without user defined folder
- `untaged`: images without tag
- `random`: all images but sorted randomly
- `trash` bin: images that were "deleted"

User can create their own folders, give them a name, a description and an assosiated tag(s) (any image within this folder will automatically receive this tag(s)). User is also able to delete folders. Images within deleted folders are not removed from collection but they lose deleted folder data from their metadata.

---

### Center part

#### Image grid

The biggest part of the center. Has 2 states:
- image grid
- image view

Image grid consists of images from current folder. Images are shown by their preview images. They are organized in a grid like manner. User can scroll up and down to see other images from the folder.  User can select any image by clicking on it once, it will open image metadata on the [right column](#inspector).

If user double clicks any image, the image grid will switch to image view mode. In this mode only selected image is visible. The selected image is viewed in it's full resolution  and takes up all of the image grid space. User can zoom in and out of this image (#TODO: add image view features). In order to switch between images within current folder in this mode, User can either press right or left keys or scroll mouse wheel. It will switch images in the sorted order. In order to exit image view User can either select another folder, reselect current folder or press `esc` key.

#### Top row

Top row consists of 2 parts:
- filters on the left
- sorting on the right

Filters is a horizontal list of buttons each corresponding to one filter parameter. When you press on a filter button, the corresponding flyout menu will open where User can put in filter parameters. User can filter images based on:
- `folders`
- `tags`
- `types` (png, jpg, etc.)
- `rating`
- `date` (there will be a list of common dates, such as `today` or `yesterdat` or User can choose their own range of dates)
- `dimenstions` (User can choose min and max values for width and height)
- `size` (User can choose min and max values)

sorting button is located on the right of the uppper row. When pressing sorting button a flyout menu opens where User can choose the sorting parameter and whether it will sort in descending or ascending order. Images can be sorted by:
- `date`
- `title`
- `extension`
- `size`
- `dimensions`
- `rating`
- `random`

##### Folder/Tag filter

This is one of the most important feature. 

---

### Inspector

Located on the right side of the app. 

When folder is chosen the folder metadata is displayed:
- `name` (can be changed for user defined folders)
- `description` (only for user defined folders, can be changed)
- `items` (amount of items)
- `size`
- `date of creation` (only for user defined folders)

When image is chosen, metadata of image is displayed. Some metadata can be modified. Here is the list of metadata:
- image preview
- `name` (can be changed by the User)
- `tags` (tags can be added/removed)
- `notes` (can be changed by the user)
- `folders` (folders can be added/removed)
- `rating` (can be change by the user)
- `dimensions`
- `size`
- `type` (png, jpg, etc.)
- `date`

---

## Contribution

The documentation will change over time. If you want to add new features, correct mistakes or make changes to existing features feel free to change the documentation and commit the changes for a review!

After editing the document add your name to the authors list and update the "last edited" date
